<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <meta charset="UTF-8" />
    <meta http-equiv="X-UA-Compatible" content="IE=edge" />
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" />
    <title>Document</title>

    <link href="../Styles/fonts.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
    <link href="../Styles/styles.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
    <link href="../Styles/bootstrap.min.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />

    <style></style>
  </head>
  <body>
    <p class="preface-title">参 考 书 目</p>
    <p class="preface-para2">
      BDAG&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;麦启新主编：《新约及早期基督教文献希腊文大词典》第 1 版，2009年汉语圣经协会出版。（鲍尔（W. Bauer）德语原著，英语第3版由丹克（Frederick W. Danker）主编，2001年芝加哥大学出版社出版的，A Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament and Other Early Christian Literature）3rd edition。英语第1版由阿恩特（William F. Arndt）及金格里奇（F. Wilbur Gingrich）合编。
    </p>

    <p class="preface-para2">
      BDB&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;布朗、德赖法、布里格斯（Brown、Driver、Briggs）合编：《旧约希伯来语大词典》,1906。A Hebrew and English Lexicon
      of the Old Testament：Based on the Lexicon of William Gesenius，1906，1980，Oxford Clarendon Press.
    </p>

    <p class="preface-para2">
      HALOT&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;科勒、鲍姆加特纳（Ludwig Koehler &amp; Walter Baumgartner）合编：《旧约希伯来语亚兰语大词典》The Hebrew and
      Aramaic Lexicon of the Old Testament，2001，published by Brill.
    </p>

    <p class="preface-para2">
      LN&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;洛、奈达（Johannes P. Louw 及 Eugene A. Nida）合编：《语义定义域希腊文词典》。Greek-English Lexicon of the New
      Testament: Based on Semantic Domains，published by Hendrickson Publishers，2019.
    </p>

    <p class="preface-para2">
      MM&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;莫尔顿、米利根（James Hope Moulton、George
      Milligan）合编：《希腊文新约词汇——纸莎草纸及其他非文学性资料研究》The Vocabulary of the Greek Testament:
      Illustrated from the Papyri and Other Non-Literary Sources，published by Eerdmans，1980.
    </p>

    <p class="preface-para2">
      NA28&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;内斯特里、阿兰（Nestle-Aland）合编：《希腊语新约》第28版，2016，德国圣经公会出版。Nestle-Aland Novum
      Testamentum Graece，28th revised edition, 2016. Published by Deutsche Bibelgesellschaft.
    </p>
    <p class="preface-para2">
      SNT&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;特伦丘（Richard C. Trench）编著：《新约同义词近义词讲义》1880年，第9版。Synonyms of The New Testament，9th
      edition， published by Eerdmans，1978.
    </p>

    <p class="preface-para2">
      TC&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;梅茨格（Bruce M. Metzger）主编：《希腊文新约文本注释》第2版，1994年联合圣经公会出版。A Textual Commentary on
      the Greek New Testament，2nd edition，published jointly by Deutsche Bibelgesellschaft and United Bible
      Societies，1994.
    </p>

    <p class="preface-para2">
      TDNT&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;基特尔（Gerhard Kittel）弗里德里希（Gerhard Friedrich）合编：《新约神学词典》。Theological Dictionary of the
      New Testament，edited by Gerhard Kittel and Gerhard Friedrich. Abridged one-volume edition by Geoffrey W.
      Bromiley.
    </p>

    <p class="preface-para2">
      THAY&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;赛雅（Joseph H. Thayer）主编：《新约希腊文大词典》。A Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament，published
      by Hendrickson Publishers，1995.
    </p>

    <p class="preface-para2">
      UBS5&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;B·阿兰（Barbara Aland）、K·阿兰（Kurt Aland）、卡拉维多普洛斯（Johannes Karavidopoulos）、马蒂尼（Carlo
      Martini）、梅茨格（Bruce Metzger）合编：《希腊语新约》第5版，2014，联合圣经公会出版。The Greek New Testament，5th
      edition. Published jointly by Deutsche Bibelgesellschaft and American Bible Society and United Bible Societies,
      2014.
    </p>
  </body>
</html>
