<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <meta charset="UTF-8" />
    <meta http-equiv="X-UA-Compatible" content="IE=edge" />
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" />
    <title>Document</title>

    <link href="../Styles/fonts.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
    <link href="../Styles/styles.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
    <link href="../Styles/bootstrap.min.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />

    <style></style>
  </head>
  <body>
    <p class="preface-title">參 考 書 目</p>
    <p class="preface-para2">
      BDAG&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;麥啓新主編：《新約及早期基督教文獻希臘文大詞典》第 1 版，2009，漢語聖經協會出版。鮑爾（W. Bauer）德語原著，英語第3版由丹克（Frederick W. Danker）主編，2001年芝加哥大學出版社出版的，A Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament and Other Early Christian Literature，3rd edition。英語第1版由阿恩特（William F. Arndt）及金格里奇（F. Wilbur Gingrich）合編。
    </p>

    <p class="preface-para2">
      BDB&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;布朗、德賴法、布里格斯（Brown、Driver、Briggs）合編：《舊約希伯來語大詞典》,1906。A
      Hebrew and English Lexicon of the Old Testament：Based on the Lexicon of William Gesenius，1906，1980，Oxford
      Clarendon Press.
    </p>

    <p class="preface-para2">
      HALOT&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;科勒、鮑姆加特納（Ludwig Koehler &amp; Walter
      Baumgartner）合編：《舊約希伯來語亞蘭語大詞典》The Hebrew and Aramaic Lexicon of the Old
      Testament，2001，published by Brill.
    </p>

    <p class="preface-para2">
      LN&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;洛、奈達（Johannes P. Louw 及 Eugene A.
      Nida）合編：《語義定義域希臘文詞典》。Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament: Based on Semantic
      Domains，published by Hendrickson Publishers，2019.
    </p>

    <p class="preface-para2">
      MM&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;莫爾頓、米利根（James Hope Moulton、George
      Milligan）合編：《希臘文新約詞匯——紙莎草紙及其他非文學性資料研究》The Vocabulary of the Greek Testament:
      Illustrated from the Papyri and Other Non-Literary Sources，published by Eerdmans，1980.
    </p>

    <p class="preface-para2">
      NA28&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;內斯特里、阿蘭（Nestle-Aland）合編：《希臘語新約》第28版，2016，德國聖經公會出版。Nestle-Aland
      Novum Testamentum Graece，28th revised edition, 2016. Published by Deutsche Bibelgesellschaft.
    </p>
    <p class="preface-para2">
      SNT&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;特倫丘（Richard C. Trench）編著：《新約同義詞近義詞講義》1880年，第9版。Synonyms
      of The New Testament，9th edition， published by Eerdmans，1978.
    </p>

    <p class="preface-para2">
      TC&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;梅茨格（Bruce M.
      Metzger）主編：《希臘文新約文本注釋》第2版，1994年聯合聖經公會出版。A Textual Commentary on the Greek New
      Testament，2nd edition，published jointly by Deutsche Bibelgesellschaft and United Bible Societies，1994.
    </p>

    <p class="preface-para2">
      TDNT&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;基特爾（Gerhard Kittel）弗里德里希（Gerhard
      Friedrich）合編：《新約神學詞典》。Theological Dictionary of the New Testament，edited by Gerhard Kittel and
      Gerhard Friedrich. Abridged one-volume edition by Geoffrey W. Bromiley.
    </p>

    <p class="preface-para2">
      THAY&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;賽雅（Joseph H. Thayer）主編：《新約希臘文大詞典》。A Greek-English Lexicon of the New
      Testament，published by Hendrickson Publishers，1995.
    </p>

    <p class="preface-para2">
      UBS5&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;B·阿蘭（Barbara Aland）、K·阿蘭（Kurt Aland）、卡拉維多普洛斯（Johannes
      Karavidopoulos）、馬蒂尼（Carlo Martini）、梅茨格（Bruce
      Metzger）合編：《希臘語新約》第5版，2014，聯合聖經公會出版。The Greek New Testament，5th edition. Published
      jointly by Deutsche Bibelgesellschaft and American Bible Society and United Bible Societies, 2014.
    </p>
  </body>
</html>
